Describe the purpose of the Python code provided. How does it access the OpenAI API using an API key and monitor rate limit usage? Discuss the importance of monitoring rate limits in API usage.

Purpose of the Python Code:
The provided Python code is designed to:
Authenticate with the OpenAI API using an API key.
Retrieve the current API usage details, specifically rate limit information.
Print the rate limit usage so the developer can monitor API consumption and avoid hitting usage caps.

How the Code Works:
1. Importing OpenAI Library
import openai
This imports the official OpenAI Python SDK, which provides functions for interacting with the API.
2. Setting the API Key
openai.api_key = 'YOUR_API_KEY'
This line assigns your secret API key to the SDK.
The key authorizes your program to access OpenAI’s services.
It must be kept private—never hard-code it in production (use environment variables instead).
3. Retrieving Usage Information
usage = openai.Usage.retrieve()
Calls the Usage.retrieve() endpoint.
This returns current usage statistics, including rate-limit consumption.
4. Printing the Usage
print("Current Rate Limit Usage:\n", usage)
Displays usage details such as tokens consumed, requests made, and remaining quota.

Rate Limit Usage:
API rate limits typically include:
Requests per minute (RPM)
Tokens per minute (TPM)
Daily / monthly credit limits
Model-specific limits
Monitoring these helps ensure smooth operation of your application.

Why Monitoring Rate Limits Is Important:
1. Prevents API Errors
If your application exceeds rate limits, the API will return:
429 Too Many Requests
Temporary bans or cooldowns
This can cause service disruptions.
2. Ensures Application Reliability
Apps that rely on the API (chatbots, RAG systems, analytics tools) need continuous availability.
Monitoring usage helps you:
Queue requests
Implement backoff strategies
Avoid downtime
3. Cost Control
API usage equals cost. Checking usage helps:
Track billing
Prevent accidental overspending
Detect unexpected spikes in token usage
4. Performance Optimization
Monitoring rate limits helps developers:
Identify inefficient prompts
Reduce excessive token usage
Optimize batch processing